Number the Stars

THE HOUSE BY THE SEA

"Oh, Annemarie," Ellen said, with awe in her voice, "it is
beautiful."

Annemarie looked around and nodded her head in agreement.
The house and the meadows that surrounded it were so much a part
of her childhood, a part of her life, that she didn't often look at them
with fresh eyes. But now she did, seeing Ellen's pleasure. And it
was true. They were beautiful.

The little red-roofed farmhouse was very old, its chimney
crooked and even the small, shuttered windows tilted at angles. A
bird's nest, wispy with straw, was half hidden in the corner where
the roof met the wall above a bedroom window. Nearby, a gnarled
tree was still speckled with a few apples now long past ripe.

Mama and Kirsti had gone inside, but Annemarie and Ellen ran
across the high-grassed meadow, through the late wildflowers.
From nowhere, a gray kitten appeared and ran beside them,
pouncing here and there upon imagined mice, pausing to lick its
paws, and then darting off again. It pretended to ignore the girls, but
looked back often to be certain that they were still there, apparently
pleased to have playmates.

The meadow ended at the sea, and the gray water licked there
at damp brown grass flattened by the wind and bordered by
smooth heavy stones.

"I have never been this close to the sea," Ellen said.

"Of course you have. You've been to the harbor in Copenhagen
a million times."

Ellen laughed. "I mean the real sea, the way it is here. Open like
this —a whole world of water."

Annemarie shook her head in amazement. To live in Denmark, a
country surrounded by water, and never to have stood at its edge?

"Your parents are really city people, aren't they?"

Ellen nodded. "My mother is afraid of the ocean," she said,
laughing. "She says it is too big for her. And too cold!"

The girls sat on a rock and took off their shoes and socks. They
tiptoed across the damp stones and let the water touch their feet. It
was cold. They giggled and stepped back.

Annemarie leaned down and picked up a brown leaf that floated
back and forth with the movement of the water.

"Look," she said. "This leaf may have come from a tree in
Sweden. It could have blown from a tree into the sea, and floated
all the way across. See over there?" she said, pointing. "Sec the
land? Way across there? That's Sweden."

Ellen cupped one hand over her eyes and looked across the
water at the misty shoreline that was another country. "It's not so
very far," she said.

"Maybe," Annemarie suggested, "standing over there are two
girls just our age, looking across and saying, 'That's Denmark!'"

They squinted into the hazy distance, as if they might see
Swedish children standing there and looking back. But it was too
far. They saw only the hazy strip of land and two small boats
bobbing up and down in the gray ruffles of separating water.

"I wonder if one of those is your Uncle Henrik's boat," Ellen
said.

"Maybe. I can't tell. They're too far away. Uncle Henrik's boat is
named the Ingeborg," she told Ellen, "for Mama."

Ellen looked around. "Does he keep it right here? Does he tie it
up so that it won't float away?"

Annemarie laughed. "Oh, no. In town, at the harbor, there's a
big dock, and all the fishing boats go and come from there. That's
where they unload their fish. You should smell it! At night they are
all there, anchored in the harbor."

"Annemarie! Ellen!" Mama's voice came across the meadow.
The girls looked around, and saw her waving to them. They turned,
picked up their shoes, and began walking toward the house. The
kitten, who had settled comfortably on the stony shore, rose
immediately and followed them.

"I took Ellen down to show her the sea," Annemarie explained
when they reached the place where Mama waited. "She'd never
been that close before! We started to wade, but it was too cold. I
wish we had come in summer so we could swim."

"It's cold even then," Mama said. She looked around. "You
didn't see anyone, did you? You didn't talk to anyone?"

Annemarie shook her head. "Just the kitten." Ellen had picked it
up, and it lay purring in her arms as she stroked its small head and
talked to it softly.

"I meant to warn you. You must stay away from people while
we are here."

"But there's no one around here," Annemarie reminded her.

"Even so. If you see anyone at all— even someone you know,
one of Henrik's friends —it is better if you come in the house. It is
too difficult — maybe even dangerous — to explain who Ellen is."
Ellen looked up and bit her lip. "There aren't soldiers here, too?"
she asked.

Mama sighed. "I'm afraid there are soldiers everywhere. And
especially now. This is a bad time.

"Come in now and help me fix supper. Henrik will be home
soon. Watch the step there; it's loose. Do you know what I have
done? I found enough apples for applesauce. Even though there is
no sugar, the apples are sweet. Henrik will bring home some fish
and there is wood for the fire, so tonight we will be warm and well
fed."

"It is not a bad time, then," Annemarie told her. "Not if there is
applesauce."

Ellen kissed the kitten's head and let it leap from her arms to the
ground. It darted away and disappeared in the tall grass. They
followed Mama into the house.

That night, the girls dressed for bed in the small upstairs
bedroom they were sharing, the same bedroom that had been
Mama's when she was a little girl. Across the hall, Kirsti was
already asleep in the wide bed that had once belonged to
Annemarie's grandparents.

Ellen touched her neck after she had put on Annemarie's flower-
sprigged nightgown, which Mama had packed.

"Where is my necklace?" she asked. "What did you do with it?"

"I hid it in a safe place," Annemarie told her. "A very secret
place where no one will ever find it. And I will keep it there for you
until it is safe for you to wear it again."

Ellen nodded. "Papa gave it to me when I was very small," she
explained.

She sat down on the edge of the old bed and ran her fingers
along the handmade quilt that covered it. The flowers and birds,
faded now, had been stitched onto the quilt by Annemarie's great-
grandmother many years before.

"I wish I knew where my parents are," Ellen said in a small voice
as she outlined one of the appliqued birds with her finger.

Annemarie didn't have an answer for her. She patted Ellen's
hand and they sat together silently. Through the window, they could
sec a thin, round slice of moon appear through the clouds, against
the pale sky. The Scandinavian night was not very dark yet, though
soon, when winter came, the night would be not only dark but very
long, night skies beginning in the late afternoon and lasting through
morning.

From downstairs, they could hear Mama's voice, and Uncle
Henrik's, talking, catching up on news. Mama missed her brother
when she hadn't seen him for a while, Annemarie knew. They were
very close. Mama always teased him gently for not marrying; she
asked him, laughing, when they were together, whether he had
found a good wife yet, one who would keep his house tidier. Henrik
teased back, and told Mama that she should come to Gilleleje to
live again so that he wouldn't have to do all the chores by himself.

For a moment, to Annemarie, listening, it seemed like all the
earlier times, the happy visits to the farm in the past with summer
daylight extending beyond bedtime, with the children tucked away
in the bedrooms and the grownups downstairs talking.

But there was a difference. In the earlier times, she had always
overheard laughter. Tonight there was no laughter at all.
