9 Don’t Bow(鞠躬) to Authority(威信)

Authority Bias

The first book of the Bible explains what happens when we disobey(違抗) a great authority: We get ejected from paradise(天堂). This is also what less celestial(天外的) authorities would have us believe — political pundits(權威者), scientists, doctors, CEOs, economists, government heads, sports commentators(時事評論者), consultants, and stock market gurus(大師).

Authorities pose(造成) two main problems to clear thinking: First, their track records are often sobering. There are about one million trained economists on the planet, and not one of them could accurately(準確的) predict the timing of the 2008 financial crisis (with the exception of Nouriel Roubini and Nassim Taleb), let alone how the collapse(坍塌) would play out, from the real estate bubble bursting to credit default swaps collapsing, right through to the full-blown economic crunch(嚴峻的形勢). Never has a group of experts failed so spectacularly(引人注目地). The story from the medical world is much the same: Up until 1900 it was discernibly(明顯地) wiser for patients to avoid doctor’s visits; too often the “treatment” only worsened(使更壞) the illness, due to poor hygiene(衛生) and folk practices(慣常做法) such as bloodletting(放血).

Psychologist(心理學家) Stanley Milgram demonstrated(顯示) the authority bias most clearly in an experiment in 1961. His subjects were instructed to administer(施行) ever-increasing electrical shocks to a person sitting on the other side of a pane of glass. They were told to start with 15 volts, then 30 volts, 45 volts, and so on, until they reached the maximum — a lethal(致命的) dose(一劑) of 450 volts. In reality, no electrical current was actually flowing; Milgram used an actor to play the role of the victim, but those charged with administering the shocks didn’t know that. The results were, well, shocking: As the person in the other room wailed(號啕大哭) and writhed(扭動) in pain, and the subject administering the shock wanted to stop, the professor would say, “Keep going, the experiment depends on it.” The majority(大部分) of people continued with the electrocution(觸電刑). More than half of the participants(參與者) went all the way up to the maximum voltage — out of sheer(徹底的) obedience(服從) to authority.

Over the past decade(十年), airlines have also learned the dangers of the authority bias. In the old days, the captain was king. His commands were not to be doubted(懷疑). If a copilot(副駕駛員) suspected(有嫌疑的) an oversight(疏漏), he wouldn’t have dared(敢於) to address(對付) it out of respect for — or fear of — his captain. Since this behavior was discovered(發現), nearly every airline has instituted(制定) crew(全體機員) resource management (CRM), which coaches(訓練) pilots and their crews to discuss any reservations(異議) they have openly and quickly. In other words: They carefully deprogram(使放棄被灌輸的信念) the authority bias. CRM has contributed more to flight safety in the past twenty years than have any technical advances.

Many companies are light-years from this sort of foresight(先見之明). Especially at risk are firms with domineering(跋扈的) CEOs, where employees are likely to keep their “lesser” opinions to themselves — much to the detriment(損傷) of the business.

Authorities crave(渴望獲得) recognition(表彰) and constantly find ways to reinforce(加固) their status. Doctors and researchers sport white coats. Bank directors don(穿上) suits and ties. Kings wear crowns(王冠). Members of the military wield(揮舞) rank(官階) badges(徽章). Today, even more symbols and props(道具) are used to signal expertise(專門技術): appearances(出現) on talk shows and on the covers of magazines, to book tours and Wikipedia entries. Authority changes much like fashion does, and society follows it just as much.

In conclusion: Whenever you are about to make a decision, think about which authority figures might be exerting(施加) an influence on your reasoning. And when you encounter(偶然相遇) one in the flesh(肉體), do your best to challenge(挑戰) him or her. 

accurately 準確的；精確的；正確的 
address 對付；滿足 
administer 給予；施用；施行 
appearances 出現；顯露 
authority 威信；權力；管轄權 
badges 徽章；獎章；證章；紀念章 
bloodletting 【醫】放血；流血 
bow （使）鞠躬；（使）欠身；點（頭）致意 
bursting 【口】渴望的，急切的；（尿）憋不住的 
celestial 天的，天空的；天外的 
challenge 挑戰；難題；考驗 
coaches 訓練；培訓；指導；（尤指私人）輔導 
collapse （由於壓力、無力或缺乏支持而）倒塌，坍塌，崩潰，垮掉 
commentators （電臺、電視臺等的）時事評論者；實況播音員；注釋者，評註者 
copilot 【空】副駕駛員 
crave 渴望獲得；迫切需要；懇求，請求 
crew 全體船員；（飛機或太空船的）全體機員，空勤人員 
crowns 王冠，皇冠；冕 
crunch 嚴峻的形勢；緊要關頭；需要作出艱難抉擇的時刻 
dared 敢於；膽敢，竟敢 
decade 十年；年代 
demonstrated 顯示；表明 
deprogram 使放棄被灌輸的信念（被毒化的思想等等） 
detriment 損傷 
discernibly 明顯地 
discovered 發現 
disobey 違反，違抗，不聽從 
domineering 跋扈的；盛氣凌人的；domineer的動詞現在分詞、動名詞 
don 穿上（衣服） 
dose 一劑 
doubted 懷疑；不相信；不能肯定 
electrocution 觸電死亡；電刑處死 
encounter 偶然相遇，邂逅，不期而遇 
exerting 運用；行使（權威、權力等）；施加（影響等） 
expertise 專門知識；專門技術；專家鑑定 
flesh 肉體 
foresight 深謀遠慮；先見之明；遠見卓識 
gurus 古魯（印度教的導師）；【口】宗師；權威；大師 
hygiene 衛生；衛生學；保健法 
instituted 建立；制定；開始 
lethal 致命的；極其危險的 
majority 大多數，大部分 
obedience 服從，順從 
oversight 失察；疏忽；疏漏 
paradise （通常大寫）天堂 
participants 關係者；參與者 
pose 造成，引起（尤指問題或困難） 
practices 慣常做法，慣例；習俗 
props 道具（= 
psychologist 心理學家 
pundits 【謔】博學（或自稱博學）的人；真實（或自命為）權威者；梵學家 
rank 職位；官階；軍銜 
recognition 賞識，讚賞；表彰 
reinforce 加固；使更結實 
reservations 保留（意見）；異議 
sheer 完全的，徹底的 
sobering 使清醒的；使冷靜的；使嚴肅的；重大的；嚴重的 
spectacularly 壯觀地；引人注目地 
suspected 有嫌疑的；被懷疑可能存在的 
wailed 慟哭；號啕大哭 
wield 揮舞，握，抓著（武器或工具） 
worsened （使）更壞；（使）惡化 
writhed 扭動；蠕動 


