8 Murder(謀殺) Your Darlings(寶貝)

Confirmation Bias (Part 2)

In the previous(先前的) chapter, we met the father of all fallacies(謬誤), the confirmation bias. Here are a few examples of it: We are forced to establish(建立) beliefs about the world, our lives, the economy, investments, our careers, and more. We deal mostly in assumptions(假定), and the more nebulous(含糊的) these are, the stronger the confirmation bias. Whether you go through life believing that “people are inherently(天性地) good” or “people are inherently bad,” you will find daily proof to support your case. Both parties, the philanthropists(慈善家) and the misanthropes(厭世者), simply filter disconfirming evidence (evidence to the contrary) and focus on the do-gooders and dictators(獨裁者) who support their worldviews(世界觀).

Astrologers and economists operate on the same principle. They utter(講) prophecies(預言) so vague(朦朧的) that any event can substantiate(證明…屬實) them: “In the coming weeks you will experience sadness(傷心),” or “In the medium(中間的) term, the pressure on the dollar will increase.” But what is the medium term? What will cause the dollar to depreciate(使貶值)? And depreciation measured against what — gold, yen, pesos, wheat, residential(居住的) property in Manhattan, the average(平均) price of a hot dog?

Religious and philosophical(哲學的) beliefs represent an excellent breeding(繁殖) ground for the confirmation bias. Here, in soft, spongy terrain, it grows wild and free. For example, worshippers always find evidence for God’s existence(存在), even though he never shows himself overtly(明顯地) — except to illiterates(文盲的) in the desert and in isolated(偏遠的) mountain villages. It is never to the masses in, say, Frankfurt or New York. Counterarguments are dismissed(對…不予理會) by the faithful, demonstrating just how powerful the confirmation bias is.

No professionals(很內行的) suffer more from the confirmation(（確定) bias(偏見) than business journalists(新聞工作者). Often, they formulate(使公式化) an easy theory, pad(（填塞) it out with two or three pieces of “evidence,” and call it a day. For example: “Google is so successful because the company nurtures(培育) a culture of creativity(創造力).” Once this idea is on paper, the journalist corroborates(確證) it by mentioning a few other prosperous(繁榮的) companies that foster(鼓勵) ingenuity(獨創力). Rarely does the writer seek out disconfirming(證明為不確) evidence, which in this instance would be struggling(艱難謀生的) businesses that live and breathe creativity or, conversely(反過來說), flourishing firms that are utterly uncreative(缺乏創造性的). Both groups have plenty of members, but the journalist simply ignores them. If he or she were to mention just one, the story line would be ruined(毀掉了的).

Self-help and get-rich-quick books are further examples of blinkered(（目光偏狹的) storytelling. Their shrewd(精明的) authors collect piles of proof to pump up the most banal(平庸的) of theories, such as “meditation is the key to happiness.” Any reader seeking disconfirming evidence does so in vain(徒然的): Nowhere in these books do we see people who lead fulfilled(滿足的) lives without meditation, or those who, despite meditation, are still sad.

The Internet is particularly fertile(肥沃的) ground for the confirmation bias. To stay informed(瞭解情況的), we browse news sites and blogs, forgetting that our favored pages mirror(反映) our existing values, be they liberal(自由開放的), conservative(保守的), or somewhere in between. Moreover, a lot of sites now tailor(專門製作) content to personal interests and browsing history, causing new and divergent(分歧的) opinions to vanish(消失) from the radar altogether. We inevitably(不可避免地) land(到岸) in communities of like-minded people, further reinforcing(加固) our convictions(堅定的看法) — and the confirmation bias.

Literary(文學的) critic(評論家) Arthur Quiller-Couch had a memorable(難忘的) motto(座右銘): “Murder your darlings.” This was his advice to writers who struggled with cutting cherished(鍾愛) but redundant(多餘的) sentences. Quiller-Couch’s appeal is not just for hesitant(躊躇的) hacks but for all of us who suffer from the deafening silence of assent(同意). To fight against the confirmation bias, try writing down your beliefs — whether in terms of worldview, investments, marriage, health care, diet, career strategies — and set out to find disconfirming evidence. Axing(撤銷) beliefs that feel like old friends is hard work but imperative(極重要的). 

assent 同意；贊成 
assumptions 假定，設想 
astrologers astrologer的名詞複數 
average 平均數；平均 
axing （突然）裁減，撤銷，取消，砍掉 
banal 平庸的；陳腐的 
bias 偏見；偏心；偏袒 
blinkered （馬）戴上眼罩的；目光偏狹的 
breeding （動物的）繁殖，飼養；（植物的）培植 
cherished 珍愛，鍾愛；愛護 
confirmation （常指書面的）確認，確定 
conservative 保守的，守舊的；傳統的，老式的 
conversely 反過來說；相反地 
convictions 堅定的看法；堅定的信念；堅定的信仰 
corroborates 證實，確證；鞏固；堅定 
creativity 創造力 
critic 批評家，評論家；持批評態度的人；吹毛求疵的人，愛挑剔的人 
darlings 親愛的；寶貝；極受歡迎的人 
depreciate 降低……的價值（或價格）；使貶值；輕視，貶低 
dictators 獨裁者；【史】（古羅馬握有非常時期權力的）獨裁官 
disconfirming 證明為不確 
dismissed 對…不予理會，摒棄，（從頭腦中）去除 
divergent 分歧的；相異的；發散的 
establish 建立；設立；創立 
existence 存在；實有 
fallacies 謬誤；謬論；謬見 
fertile 肥沃的；富饒的 
formulate 使公式化；用公式表示；系統地闡述（或說明） 
foster 鼓勵；促進；培養 
fulfilled 滿足的；滿意的 
hesitant 遲疑的；躊躇的 
illiterates 文盲的；未受教育的；知識淺陋的 
imperative 極重要的；緊急的；迫切的 
inevitably 不可避免地 
informed 見多識廣的；瞭解情況的 
ingenuity 心靈手巧；足智多謀；獨創力 
inherently 天性地；固有地 
isolated 偏遠的 
journalists 新聞工作者，新聞記者；報人；記日誌者 
land 到岸，到港 
liberal 自由開放的，開放的，開明的 
literary 文學的，與文學相關的 
medium 中間的；中等的；適中的 
memorable 難忘的；值得紀念的 
mirror 反映 
misanthropes 厭世者；不願與人來往者 
motto 座右銘；格言；訓言；（書籍扉頁上或章節前引用的）警句；題詞 
murder 謀殺，兇殺；謀殺罪 
nebulous 星雲的；朦朧的；含糊的 
nurtures 營養物，食物；養育，教養，培育 
overtly 明顯地；公然；【律】蓄意地 
pad （用軟物）填塞，填襯 
philanthropists 慈善家 
philosophical 哲學的；通曉哲學的；研究哲學的 
previous 以前的，先前的 
professionals 很內行的；極稱職的；高水準的 
prophecies （尤指基於主觀判斷的）預言 
prosperous 繁榮的；富裕的 
redundant 多餘的，過剩的；累贅的，冗長的 
reinforcing 加固；使更結實 
residential 居住的；住宅的；作住所用的；適合於居住的；供學生住宿的 
ruined 毀掉了的，毀滅了的，被破壞的 
sadness 傷心的，悲哀的；令人難過的，令人遺憾的 
shrewd 明智的；精明的 
struggling 艱難謀生的 
substantiate 證明…屬實；證實 
tailor 專門製作，使適應特定需要 
uncreative 缺乏創造性的 
utter 發出（聲音等）；說，講；表達 
vague （形狀等）模糊不清的，朦朧的 
vain 徒然的，無益的 
vanish （尤指突然）消失，滅絕 
worldviews 世界觀 


