6 Don’t Accept Free Drinks

Reciprocity

Not so long ago, you may have come across disciples(信徒) of the Hare Krishna sect floating around in saffron-colored robes as you hurried to catch a flight or a train to your destination(目的地). A member of the sect(宗派) presented you with a small flower and a smile. If you’re like most people, you took the flower simply to avoid(避免) seeming rude. If you tried to refuse, you would have heard a gentle “Take it, this is our gift to you.” If you wanted to dispose of the flower in the next trash(垃圾) can, you found that there were already a few there. But that was not the end. Just as your bad conscience(良心) started to tug(（拉拖) at you, another disciple of Krishna approached(接近) you again, this time asking for a donation(捐獻). In many cases, this plea was successful — so pervasive(普遍的) that many airports banned(被禁的) the sect from the premises(場所).

Psychologist(心理學家) Robert Cialdini can explain the success of this and other such campaigns(（運動). He has studied the phenomenon(（現象) of reciprocity and has established that people have extreme difficulty being in another person’s debt.

Many NGOs and philanthropic(慈善的) organizations use exactly the same techniques(技術): First give, then take. Last week, a conservation(對自然資源保護) organization sent me an envelope(信封) full of postcards featuring(以…為特色) all sorts of idyllic(有田園之美的) landscapes. The accompanying(伴隨的) letter assured me that the postcards were a gift to be kept, whether or not I decided to donate(捐贈) to their organization. Even though I understood the tactic(手法), it took a little willpower and ruthlessness(無情) to throw them in the trash.

Unfortunately(不幸地), this kind of gentle blackmail(敲詐) — you could also call it corruption(貪汙) — is widespread(廣泛的). A supplier of screws(螺絲) invites a potential customer to join him at a big sports game. A month later, it’s time to order screws. The desire not to be in debt(欠款) is so strong that the buyer gives in and places an order with his new friend.

It is also an ancient(古老的) technique. We find reciprocity(互惠) in all species(物種) whose food supplies are subject(易受……的) to high fluctuations(波動). Suppose you are a hunter-gatherer. One day you are lucky and kill a deer(鹿). You can’t possibly eat all of it in a day, and refrigerators(雪櫃) are still a few centuries away. You decide to share the deer with the group, which ensures(保證) that you will benefit(受惠) from others’ spoils(掠奪物) when your haul is less impressive(給人深刻印象的). The bellies of your buddies serve as your refrigerator.

Reciprocity is a very useful survival(存活) strategy(戰略), a form of risk management. Without it, humanity — and countless species of animals — would be long extinct(滅絕的). It is at the core of cooperation(合作，協力) between people (who are not related) and a necessary(必要的) ingredient(（要素) for economic growth and wealth creation. There would be no global economy without it — there would be no economy at all. That’s the good side of reciprocity.

But there is also an ugly side of reciprocity: retaliation(報復). Revenge(替……報仇) breeds counter-revenge, and you soon find yourself in a full-scale war. Jesus preached that we should break this cycle by turning the other cheek(臉頰), which proves very difficult to do, so compelling(很有說服力的) is the pull of reciprocity even when the stakes(股份) are far less high.

Several years ago, a couple(夫婦) invited my wife and me to dinner. We had known this couple casually for quite some time. They were nice but far from entertaining(有趣的). We couldn’t think of a good excuse(藉口) to refuse, so we accepted. Things played out exactly as we had imagined: The dinner party was beyond tedious(冗長乏味的). Nevertheless(儘管如此), we felt obliged(必須做某事) to invite them to our home a few months later. The constraint(限制；束縛；約束) of reciprocity had now presented us with two wearisome(令人厭倦的) evenings. And, lo and behold, a few weeks later, a follow-up invitation from them arrived. I wonder how many dinner parties have been endured(忍受) in the name of reciprocity, even if the participants(參與者) would have preferred to drop out of the vicious(邪惡的) cycle years ago.

In much the same way, if someone approaches you in the supermarket, whether to offer you a taste of wine, a chunk(大塊) of cheese, or a handful(一把) of olives, my best advice is to refuse their offer — unless you want to end up with a refrigerator full of stuff you don’t even like. 

accompanying 伴隨的，陪伴的；和…一起發生的 
ancient 古代的；古老的；年代久遠的 
approached 接近，靠近 
assured 自信的；藝高膽大的 
avoid 避開；避免，防止；逃避 
banned 被禁的，被取締的；ban的動詞過去式、過去分詞 
benefit 得益，受惠；（使）受益；對…有幫助 
blackmail 敲詐，勒索，訛詐 
campaigns （尤指政治、商業或軍事的）運動 
cheek 臉頰，面頰，臉蛋 
chunk 大塊；厚塊 
compelling （理由、論證等）令人信服的，很有說服力的 
conscience 良心；良知 
conservation 保存；（對自然資源的）保護，管理 
constraint 限制；束縛；約束 
cooperation 合作，協力 
corruption （尤指當權者的）貪汙，腐敗，墮落 
couple 夫婦；未婚夫妻；一對舞伴 
debt 借款，欠款；債務 
deer 鹿 
destination 目的地，終點 
disciples 信徒，門徒；追隨者；【宗】耶穌的信徒，使徒 
dispose 使（某人）對…産生某種感覺 
donate 捐贈，捐助，捐獻 
donation 捐獻，捐贈，捐助 
endured 忍耐；忍受 
ensures 保證；擔保 
entertaining 使人愉快的；有趣的 
envelope 信封；封皮；封套 
excuse 理由；藉口 
extinct 滅絕的；絕種的；消失的 
featuring 以…為特色；給…以顯著的地位 
fluctuations 波動；變動；動搖 
handful 一把（之量） 
idyllic 田園詩的；牧歌的；風光明媚的；有田園之美的 
impressive 給人深刻印象的；令人欽佩的 
ingredient （混合物的）組成部分；（烹調的）原料；（構成）要素，因素 
necessary 必要的，必需的 
nevertheless 不過，仍然；儘管如此 
obliged 被迫做某事；必須做某事；只好做某事 
participants 關係者；參與者 
pervasive 普遍的；彌漫的；滲透的 
phenomenon （尤指不尋常的或有趣的）現象 
philanthropic 博愛的；仁慈的；慈善的 
preached 竭力勸說，竭力鼓吹 
premises （尤指公司或機構的）房屋連同地基，生產場所，經營廠址，廠區 
psychologist 心理學家 
reciprocity 相互性；相互作用；對等；互惠 
refrigerators 冰箱，雪櫃；冷藏室；冷凍庫 
retaliation 報復 
revenge 替……報仇 
ruthlessness 無情；冷酷；殘忍 
screws 螺絲（釘） 
sect 派別；黨派；（黨的）宗派；學派；【宗】分裂出來的教派（尤指異端）；宗派 
species （動植物的）種，物種 
spoils 戰利品，掠奪物 
stakes 股本，股份 
strategy 戰略；策略；計謀；行動計劃；策劃，部署 
subject 易受……的；易患……的 
survival 繼續生存，存活，倖存 
tactic 戰術；策略；手法 
techniques 技術，技能 
tedious 冗長乏味的；使人厭煩的 
trash 廢物，垃圾 
tug （用力）拉，拖，拽 
unfortunately 不幸地；倒楣地 
vicious 邪惡的；惡毒的；兇暴的 
wearisome 使人疲倦的；令人厭倦的 
widespread 廣泛的；普遍的；遍佈的 


