4 If Fifty Million(100萬) People Say Something Foolish(愚蠢的), It Is Still Foolish

Social Proof

You are on your way to a concert. At an intersection(交叉), you encounter(偶然相遇) a group of people, all staring(凝視的) at the sky. Without even thinking about it, you peer(仔細看) upward(向上的), too. Why? Social proof. In the middle of the concert(音樂會), when the soloist(獨奏者) is displaying absolute(絕對的) mastery(熟練), someone begins to clap(拍手) and suddenly the whole room joins in. You do, too. Why? Social proof. After the concert you go to the coat check(寄存) to pick up your coat. You watch how the people in front of you place a coin(硬幣) on a plate, even though, officially(官方地，正式地), the service is included in the ticket price. What do you do? You probably leave a tip as well.

Social proof, sometimes roughly(粗略地) termed(把…稱為) the “herd instinct(本能),” dictates that individuals(個人的) feel they are behaving(表現) correctly when they act the same as other people. In other words, the more people who follow a certain idea, the better (truer) we deem(認為) the idea to be. And the more people who display(顯露) a certain behavior, the more appropriate(恰當的) this behavior is judged by others. This is, of course, absurd. Social proof is the evil(邪惡的) behind bubbles and stock market panic. It exists in fashion(（服飾時尚), management techniques(技術), hobbies(嗜好), religion(宗教), and diets(節食). It can paralyze(使癱瘓) whole cultures, such as when sects(黨派) commit collective(集體的) suicide(自殺).

A simple experiment(實驗), carried out in the 1950s by legendary(名聲顯赫的) psychologist(心理學家) Solomon Asch, shows how peer(同輩) pressure can warp common sense. A subject(接受實驗者) is shown a line drawn on paper, and next to it three lines—numbered 1, 2, and 3—one shorter(短的), one longer(長的), and one the same length as the original(原先的) one. He or she must indicate(表明) which of the three lines corresponds to the original one. If the person is alone in the room, he gives correct answers because the task(任務) is really quite simple. Now five other people enter the room; they are all actors(演員), which the subject does not know. One after another, they give wrong answers, saying “number 1,” although it’s very clear that number 3 is the correct answer. Then it is the subject’s turn again. In one-third of cases, he will answer incorrectly to match the other people’s responses(回應).

Why do we act like this? Well, in the past, following others was a good survival(繼續生存) strategy(策略). Suppose that fifty thousand years ago you were traveling around the Serengeti with your hunter-gatherer friends, and suddenly they all bolted(逃向…). What would you have done? Would you have stayed put, scratching(抓) your head, and weighing(仔細考慮) up whether what you were looking at was a lion or something that just looked like a lion but was in fact a harmless(無害的) animal that could serve as a great protein(蛋白質) source? No, you would have sprinted(短距離快速奔跑) after your friends. Later on, when you were safe, you could have reflected(考慮) on what had actually happened. Those who acted differently—and I am sure there were some—exited the gene(遺傳因子) pool. We are the direct heirs(繼承人) of those who copied the others’ behavior. This pattern is so deeply rooted(根莖) in us that we still use it today, even when it offers no survival advantage(優勢). Only a few cases come to mind where social(社交) proof(證據) is of value. For example, if you find yourself hungry in a foreign(外國的) city and don’t know a good restaurant(餐館), it makes sense to pick the one that’s full of locals. In other words, you copy the locals’ behavior.

Comedy and talk shows make use of social proof by inserting canned(聽裝的) laughter at strategic spots, inciting(煽動) the audience(觀眾) to laugh along. One of the most impressive(給人深刻印象的), though troubling(煩惱), cases of this phenomenon(現象) is the famous speech by Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels, delivered to a large audience in 1943. (See it for yourself on YouTube.) As the war went from bad to worse for Germany, he demanded to know: “Do you want total war? If necessary, do you want a war more total and radical(激進的) than anything that we can even imagine today?” The crowd roared(吼叫). If the attendees(在場者) had been asked individually and anonymously(不具名地), it is likely that nobody would have consented(允許) to this crazy proposal(建議).

The advertising(廣告) industry benefits(利益) greatly from our weakness(弱點) for social proof. This works well when a situation is unclear (such as deciding among various car makes, cleaning products, beauty products, and so on, with no obvious(清楚的) advantages or disadvantages), and where people “like you and me” appear.

So be skeptical(懷疑論的) whenever a company claims(聲稱) its product is better because it is “the most popular.” How is a product better simply because it sells the most units? And remember English novelist W. Somerset Maugham’s wise words: “If fifty million people say something foolish, it is still foolish.” 


absolute 完全的；全部的；絕對的；毋庸置疑的 
actors 男演員；演員 
advantage 有利條件，優點，優勢 
advertising 廣告（業） 
anonymously 不具名地；化名地 
appropriate 適當的，恰當的；合適的 
attendees 出席者；在場者 
audience 聽眾，觀眾；讀者群 
behaving （以某種方式）表現；（使）守規矩；（使）舉止… 
benefits 利益，好處；優勢 
bolted 逃向… 
canned 罐裝的；聽裝的 
check 寄存，寄放 
claims 自稱，聲稱；主張 
clap 拍（手），擊（掌） 
coin 硬幣；金屬貨幣 
collective 聚集而成的；集體的；共同的 
concert 音樂會，演奏會 
consented 許可，允許；同意 
deem 認為，以為；視作 
dictates 影響；決定；要求 
diets 節食，限制飲食 
display 顯露，表露，表示（某種情感） 
encounter 偶然相遇，邂逅，不期而遇 
evil 道德敗壞的；邪惡的，惡毒的；討厭的 
experiment 實驗；試驗；試用 
fashion （服飾等的）流行式樣；時尚，風氣 
foolish 愚蠢的，傻的 
foreign 外國的 
gene 【生】基因，遺傳因子 
harmless 無害的；不會導致損傷的 
heirs 繼承人 
hobbies 業餘愛好，嗜好 
impressive 給人深刻印象的；令人欽佩的 
inciting 激勵；激起；煽動 
indicate 標示；表明；顯示 
individuals 個人的，個體的 
instinct 本能；天性 
intersection 橫斷，交叉 
legendary 名聲顯赫的；津津樂道的 
longer 長的；遠的 
mastery 熟練；精通；掌握 
million （數字）100萬 
obvious 清楚的；顯然的，明顯的；明白的 
officially 官方地，正式地 
original 起初的；原先的；最早的 
paralyze 使麻痺；使癱瘓；使全面停頓；使無力，使不能活動；使氣餒；使驚呆 
peer 仔細看，端詳；費力地看 同齡人；同輩；同儕；同等社會地位（或能力）的人 
phenomenon （尤指不尋常的或有趣的）現象 
proof 證據；物證 
proposal 建議；計劃；提案 
protein 蛋白質，朊 
psychologist 心理學家 
radical 激進的；過激的；極端的 
reflected 深思，考慮，認真思考（尤指可能性或意見） 
religion 宗教信仰；宗教 
responses 回答；回應，反應 
restaurant 飯店；餐館；菜館 
roared 吼叫；咆哮 
rooted 根，根莖，根塊 
roughly 大致地，近似地，粗略地 
scratching 抓；搔；擦；劃 
sects 派別；黨派；（黨的）宗派；學派；【宗】分裂出來的教派（尤指異端）；宗派 
shorter 短的；矮的 
skeptical 懷疑論的，不可知論的；懷疑宗教教條的 
social 社交的，交際的 
soloist 獨奏者；獨唱者；【空】單飛者 
sprinted 短距離快速奔跑，衝刺 
staring 凝視的 
strategy 戰略；策略；計謀；行動計劃；策劃，部署 
subject 主題；題目；題材 接受實驗者，實驗品，實驗對象 
suicide 自殺，自殺行為 
survival 繼續生存，存活，倖存 
task 任務；（尤指經常、不情願或很難做的）工作；（苦）差事 
techniques 技術，技能 
termed 把…稱為，把…叫作 
troubling 煩惱，苦惱；憂慮 
upward 向上的，朝上的；向高處的 
weakness 弱點；缺點；不足 
weighing 仔細考慮；權衡 


