5 Why You Should Forget the Past

Sunk Cost Fallacy

The film was dire(可怕). After an hour, I whispered(小聲說話) to my wife: “Come on, let’s go home.” She replied: “No way. We’re not throwing away thirty dollars.” “That’s no reason to stay,” I protested(抗議). “The money’s already gone. This is the sunk cost fallacy at work — a thinking error!” She glared(怒視) at me as if she had just bitten off a piece of lemon. Okay, I sometimes go overboard on the subject, itself an error called déformation professionnelle (see chapter 92). I desperately(極其) tried to clarify(闡明) the situation. “We have spent the thirty dollars regardless(無論如何) of whether we stay or leave, so this factor should not play a role in our decision.” Needless(不需要的) to say, I gave in and sunk back down in my seat.

The next day, I sat in a marketing meeting. Our advertising campaign(（商業運動) had been running for four months and had not met even one of its goals(目標). I was in favor of scrapping(取消) it. The advertising manager resisted, saying: “But we’ve invested so much money in it. If we stop now, it’ll all have been for nothing.” Another victim of the sunk cost fallacy.

A friend struggled(掙扎) for years in a troubled(麻煩) relationship. His girlfriend cheated(欺騙) on him time and again. Each time, she came back repentant(後悔的) and begged(懇求) for forgiveness(原諒). He explained it to me this way: “I’ve invested so much energy in the relationship, it would be wrong to throw it away.” A classic case of the sunk cost fallacy.

The sunk cost fallacy is most dangerous when we have invested a lot of time, money, energy, or love in something. This investment becomes a reason to carry on, even if we are dealing with a lost cause. The more we invest, the greater the sunk(陷入) costs are, and the greater the urge(衝動) to continue becomes.

Investors frequently fall victim(犧牲者) to the sunk cost fallacy. Often they base their trading decisions on acquisition(獲得) prices. “I lost so much money with this stock, I can’t sell it now,” they say. This is irrational(不理智的). The acquisition price should play no role. What counts is the stock’s future performance(業績) (and the future performance of alternative investments). Ironically(諷刺地), the more money a share loses, the more investors tend to stick by it.

This irrational behavior is driven by a need for consistency(一致性). After all, consistency signifies(表示) credibility(可信性). We find contradictions(矛盾) abominable(討厭的). If we decide to cancel a project halfway through, we create a contradiction: We admit that we once thought differently(不一樣的). Carrying on with a meaningless project delays this painful realization(現實) and keeps up appearances(景象).

The Concorde(協和式超音速噴射客機) is a prime(最好的) example of a government deficit(赤字) project. Even though both parties, Britain and France, had long realized that the supersonic(超音速的) aircraft business would never work, they continued to invest enormous(龐大的) sums of money in it — if only to save face. Abandoning(放棄) the project would have been tantamount(相當於) to admitting(承認) defeat(打敗). The sunk cost fallacy is therefore(因此) often referred to as the “Concorde effect.” It leads to costly, even disastrous(災難性的), errors of judgment. The Americans extended(延伸的) their involvement(纏繞) in the Vietnam War because of this. Their thinking: “We’ve already sacrificed(犧牲) so much for this war; it’d be a mistake to give up now.”

“We’ve come this far ...” “I’ve read so much of this book already ...” “But I’ve spent two years doing this course ...” If you recognize(認出) any of these thought patterns, it shows that the sunk cost fallacy is at work in a corner of your brain.

Of course, there may be good reasons to continue investing in something to finalize(完成) it. But beware(提防) of doing so for the wrong reasons, such as to justify(證明…正當) non-recoverable investments. Rational decision making requires you to forget about the costs incurred(招致) to date. No matter how much you have already invested, only your assessment(評估) of the future costs and benefits(好處) counts.

abandoning 離棄；放棄；拋棄；遺棄 
abominable 極壞的；惡劣的；可惡的；討厭的 
acquisition 獲得，取得 
admitting （尤指不情願地）承認，供認，招認 
appearances 景象，現象 
assessment 評估；估價；評估結果 
begged 請求，懇求 
benefits 利益，好處；優勢 
beware 當心，小心；注意，提防 
campaign （尤指政治、商業或軍事的）運動 
cheated 欺騙，行騙；作弊 
clarify 澄清；闡明；淨化 
concorde 協和式超音速噴射客機 
consistency 連貫性；一致性 
contradictions 矛盾 
credibility 可信性；確實性；（核子武器威懾力量的）確實有效性 
defeat 擊敗，打敗，戰勝 
deficit 不足額；赤字 
desperately 非常；極其 
differently 不同的，不一樣的，有差別的 
dire 可怕的；悲慘的；極度的；緊迫的 
disastrous 極其糟糕的，災難性的，極為失敗的 
enormous 極大的；巨大的；龐大的 
extended 延伸的；長的；延長了的 
finalize 完成；結束 
forgiveness 原諒；寬恕 
glared （長久的）怒視，瞪眼 
goals 目標；目的 
incurred 招致；遭受 
involvement 纏繞；連累 
ironically 說反話地；諷刺地 
irrational 不理智的，沒有理性的 
justify 為…辯護；證明…正當（或有理、正確）；是…的正當理由 
needless 不必要的；不需要的 
performance 工作情況；業績；表現；工作性能 
prime 最好的，第一流的 
protested 抗議；反對 
realization 領悟；認識；真實；現實；體現 
recognize 認出，識別；認識 
regardless 不管怎樣，無論如何；不管，不顧 
repentant 後悔的；悔改的 
sacrificed 犧牲；獻出 
scrapping 放棄；取消 
signifies 表示……的意思；有……的意思；表示；表明；示意 
struggled 努力；使勁；掙扎 
sunk （使）沉沒；（使）陷入 
supersonic 超音波的；超音速的 
tantamount 同等的，相當於 
therefore 因此；因而；所以 
troubled 折磨，使有麻煩 
urge （尤指難以或無法控制的）慾望，衝動 
victim 犧牲者，遇難者 
whispered 小聲說話；低語；耳語 


