1 Why You Should Visit Cemeteries(墓地)

Survivorship Bias

No matter where Rick looks, he sees rock(搖滾樂) stars. They appear on television(電視), on the front pages of magazines(雜誌), in concert(音樂會) programs, and at online fan sites. Their songs are unavoidable — in the mall(購物中心), on his playlist, in the gym. The rock(搖滾樂) stars are everywhere. There are lots of them. And they are successful. Motivated(有積極性的) by the stories of countless(無數的) guitar(吉他) heroes, Rick starts a band. Will he make it big? The probability lies a fraction(小部分) above zero. Like so many others, he will most likely end up in the graveyard of failed musicians. This burial(埋葬) ground houses ten thousand times more musicians than the stage does, but no journalist(新聞記者) is interested in failures — with the exception of fallen(墮落的) superstars(超級明星). This makes the cemetery invisible(看不見的) to outsiders.

In daily life, because triumph(勝利) is made more visible than failure(失敗), you systematically(有系統的) overestimate(對……估計過高) your chances of succeeding. As an outsider(局外人), you (like Rick) succumb(屈服) to an illusion(幻覺), and you mistake how minuscule(小) the probability of success really is. Rick, like so many others, is a victim(受害者) of survivorship bias.

Behind every popular(受歡迎的) author(作者) you can find a hundred other writers whose books will never sell. Behind them are another hundred who haven’t found publishers(出版商). Behind them are yet another hundred whose unfinished(未完成的) manuscripts(手稿) gather dust(灰塵) in drawers(抽屜). And behind each one of these are a hundred people who dream(夢想) of — one day — writing a book. You, however, hear of only the successful authors (these days, many of them self-published) and fail to recognize how unlikely literary(文學的) success is. The same goes for photographers(攝影師), entrepreneurs(企業家), artists(藝術家), athletes(運動員), architects(建築師), Nobel(諾貝爾) Prize winners, television presenters(節目主持人), and beauty queens. The media is not interested in digging around in the graveyards of the unsuccessful. Nor is this its job. To elude(逃避) the survivorship bias, you must do the digging yourself.

You will also come across survivorship(生存) bias(偏見) when dealing(交易) with money and risk: Imagine(設想) that a friend founds a start-up. You belong to the circle of potential(潛在的) investors and you sense(感覺) a real opportunity(機遇): This could be the next Google. Maybe you’ll be lucky. But what is the reality(實際情況)? The most likely(很可能的) scenario(局面) is that the company will not even make it off the starting line. The second most likely outcome(結果) is that it will go bankrupt(破產的) within three years. Of the companies that survive(倖存) these first three years, most never grow to more than ten employees. So, should you never put your hard-earned money at risk(風險)? Not necessarily. But you should recognize(識別) that the survivorship bias is at work, distorting(扭曲) the probability(可能性) of success like cut glass.

Take the Dow Jones Industrial Average index. It consists(構成) of out-and-out survivors. Failed and small businesses do not enter the stock market, and yet these represent(作為…的代表) the majority(大多數) of business ventures(（商業冒險). A stock index is not indicative(指示的) of a country’s economy(經濟). Similarly, the press does not report proportionately(成比例地) on all musicians(音樂家). The vast(廣大的) number of books and coaches dealing(交易) with success should also make you skeptical(懷疑論的): The unsuccessful(不成功的) don’t write books or give lectures on their failures(失敗).

Survivorship bias can become especially(特別) pernicious(有害的) when you become a member of the “winning” team. Even if your success stems(主幹) from pure coincidence(偶然的機遇), you’ll discover similarities with other winners and be tempted(引誘) to mark these as “success factors.” However, if you ever visit the graveyard(墓地) of failed individuals(個人) and companies, you will realize that its tenants(房客) possessed(具有) many of the same traits(個人的特徵) that characterize(描述…的特性) your success.

If enough(足夠的) scientists examine a particular(特殊的) phenomenon(現象), a few of these studies will deliver statistically(統計上) significant(重要的) results through pure coincidence(巧合) — for example, the relationship between red wine consumption(消費量) and high life expectancy. Such (false) studies immediately attain(獲得) a high degree of popularity and attention(注意力). As a result, you will not read about the studies with the “boring” but correct results.

Survivorship bias means this: People systematically overestimate their chances of success. Guard(監視) against it by frequently visiting the graves of once-promising projects, investments, and careers. It is a sad walk but one that should clear your mind.

architects 建築師；設計師；【喻】締造者，創造者 
artists 藝術家；美術家；畫家；雕塑家 
athletes 運動員，體育家；身強力壯的人 
attain 實現；獲得；贏得 
attention 注意；注意力；專心 
author 作者，作家；著者 
bankrupt 破產的，資不抵債的 
bias 偏見；偏心；偏袒 
burial 埋葬；葬禮 
cemeteries 公墓，墓地 
characterize 歸納…的特徵；描述…的特性 
coincidence 偶然的機遇，運氣 同時發生；（尤指令人吃驚的）巧合，碰巧的事 
concert 音樂會，演奏會 
consists 組成，構成 
consumption 消耗；用盡；消耗量；消費量 
countless 無數的；數不清的 
dealing 交易 發（紙牌） 
distorting 扭曲，扭歪；歪曲；曲解 
drawers 抽屜 
dream 夢想，幻想，願望 
dust 灰塵，塵土 
economy 經濟；經濟制度 
elude （巧妙地）逃避，躲避；使困惑，難倒 
enough 足夠的，充足的 
entrepreneurs 企業家；事業創辦者；承包人 
especially 特別；尤其；格外；主要 
failure 失敗；失敗的人（或事） 
failures 失敗；失敗的人（或事） 
fallen 陷落的；墮落的 
fraction 分數；小部分 
graveyard 墓地 
guard 看守；監視 
guitar 吉他 
illusion 幻覺，幻想 
imagine 想像；設想 
indicative 指示的；表示的；象徵的；暗示的；【語】直說法的 
individuals 個人的，個體的 
invisible 看不見的；無形的 
journalist 新聞工作者，新聞記者；報人；記日誌者 
lectures lecture的名詞複數 
likely 很可能的，可能要發生的 
literary 文學的，與文學相關的 
magazines 雜誌，期刊；（槍上的）彈倉，彈盒，彈盤 
majority 大多數，大部分 
mall （車輛不得入內的）商業街，購物中心 
manuscripts 手稿；原稿 
minuscule 【印】（中古抄本的）小寫字體；小寫字 
motivated 有動機的，有目的的；有積極性的 
musicians 音樂家；樂師；作曲家 
nobel 諾貝爾（Alfred 
opportunity 機遇；時機；機會；可能性 
outcome 結果，後果；效果 
outsider 局外人；外來者；外部的人 
overestimate 對……評價過高；對……估計過高 
particular 特殊的；特定的；特別的 
pernicious 有害的，有毒的；惡性的，致命的；壞的，邪惡的 
phenomenon （尤指不尋常的或有趣的）現象 
photographers 攝影師，照相師 
popular 受大眾喜愛的，受歡迎的 
possessed 擁有；具有 
potential 潛在的，可能的 
presenters 贈送者；提出者；節目主持人 
probability 可能性，或然性 
proportionately 成比例地；相稱地 
publishers 出版（或發行）者；出版（或發行）公司；出版商；發表者，公布者 
reality 現實；實際情況 
recognize 認出，識別；認識 
represent 作為…的代表（或代理人）；作為…的代言人 
risk 危險，風險 
rock 岩石；岩；礁石 搖滾樂 
scenario 【義】情節；劇本；事態；局面 
sense 官能；感覺；知覺（尤指視覺、聽覺、嗅覺、味覺和觸覺） 
significant 重要的；顯著的 
skeptical 懷疑論的，不可知論的；懷疑宗教教條的 
statistically 統計上 
stems 主幹 
succumb 屈服；委棄；聽任；被壓垮；死 
superstars 超級明星；超級星體 
survive 繼續生存，存活；（尤指）倖存 
survivorship 生存；生者對死者名下財產的享有權 
systematically 有條理的，有系統的，有計劃的 
television 電視，電視廣播 
tempted 引誘，誘惑 
tenants 房客；佃戶；承租人 
traits （個人的）特徵，特性，品質 
triumph 巨大成功；勝利；狂喜 
unfinished 未完成的 
unsuccessful 不成功的；失敗的 
vast 巨大的；廣大的 
ventures （有風險的）企業；投機活動；商業冒險 
victim 受害者，受騙者，受災者 


