2.Does Harvard(哈佛大學) Make You Smarter(精明的)?

Swimmer’s Body Illusion

As essayist(散文家) and trader Nassim Taleb resolved(下定決心的) to do something about the stubborn(頑固的) extra pounds he’d been carrying, he contemplated(盤算) taking up various sports. However, joggers(慢跑者) seemed scrawny(皮包骨的) and unhappy, and bodybuilders(鍛鍊肌肉者) looked broad(寬的) and stupid, and tennis players? Oh, so upper-middle-class! Swimmers, though, appealed(感染力) to him with their well-built, streamlined(流線型的) bodies. He decided to sign up at his local swimming pool and to train hard twice a week.

A short while later, he realized that he had succumbed(屈服) to an illusion. Professional(專家) swimmers don’t have perfect(完美的) bodies because they train extensively(廣泛地). Rather, they are good swimmers because of their physiques(體形). How their bodies are designed is a factor for selection and not the result of their activities. Similarly, female models advertise(（做廣告) cosmetics(化妝品) and, thus, many female consumers(消費者) believe that these products make you beautiful(美麗). But it is not the cosmetics that make these women model-like. Quite simply, the models are born attractive(有吸引力的), and only for this reason are they candidates for cosmetics advertising. As with the swimmers’ bodies, beauty is a factor for selection and not the result.

Whenever we confuse(混淆) selection factors with results, we fall prey to what Taleb calls the swimmer’s body illusion. Without this illusion, half of advertising campaigns(商業運動) would not work. But this bias has to do with more than just the pursuit(追求) of chiseled(輪廓分明的) cheekbones(頰骨) and chests. For example, Harvard has the reputation of being a top university. Many highly successful people have studied there. Does this mean that Harvard is a good school? We don’t know. Perhaps the school is terrible, and it simply recruits(吸收) the brightest students around. I experienced this phenomenon(現象) at the University of St. Gallen in Switzerland. It is said to be one of the top ten business schools in Europe, but the lessons I received (albeit twenty-five years ago) were mediocre(中等的). Nevertheless(儘管如此), many of its graduates were successful. The reason behind this is unknown—perhaps it was due to the climate(氣候) in the narrow valley or even the cafeteria(食堂) food. Most probable(很可能真實的), however, is the rigorous(嚴謹的) selection.

All over the world, MBA schools lure(誘惑) candidates(（申請人) with statistics regarding future income. This simple calculation is supposed to show that the horrendously(駭人聽聞地) high tuition(教學) fees pay for themselves over a short period of time. Many prospective(潛在的) students fall for this approach(方式). I am not implying(暗示) that the schools doctor(竄改文件) the statistics, but still their statements must not be swallowed wholesale. Why? Because those who pursue an MBA are different from those who do not. The income gap between both groups stems from a multitude(眾多) of reasons that have nothing to do with the MBA degree itself. Once again we see the swimmer’s body illusion(幻覺) at work: the factor for selection(挑選) confused with the result. So, if you are considering further study, do it for reasons other than a bigger paycheck(薪津).

When I ask happy people about the secret(祕密) of their contentment(滿足的), I often hear answers like “You have to see the glass half full rather than half empty.” It is as if these individuals do not realize that they were born happy and now tend to see the positive in everything. They do not realize that cheerfulness— according to many studies, such as those conducted by Harvard’s Dan Gilbert —is largely a personality(個性) trait(特徵) that remains constant throughout(自始至終) life. Or, as social scientists David Lykken and Auke Tellegen starkly(嚴厲地) suggest, “trying to be happier is as futile(無效的) as trying to be taller.” Thus, the swimmer’s body illusion is also a self-illusion. When these optimists write self-help books, the illusion can become treacherous(凶險的). That’s why it’s important to give wide berth to tips and advice from self-help authors. For billions of people, these pieces of advice are unlikely to help. But because the unhappy don’t write self-help books about their failures, this fact remains hidden.

In conclusion: Be wary(謹慎的) when you are encouraged(受到鼓舞的) to strive(力爭) for certain things—be it abs of steel, immaculate(潔淨的) looks, a higher income, a long life, a particular demeanor(行為), or happiness. You might fall prey(獵物) to the swimmer’s body illusion. Before you decide to take the plunge(投入), look in the mirror—and be honest about what you see. 


advertise （尤指為了推銷某物）登廣告，做廣告，宣傳；公佈；徵聘 
appealed 吸引力；感染力；魅力 
approach （思考問題的）方式，方法，態度 
attractive 有吸引力的；引人注目的；嫵媚動人的 
beautiful 美麗的，漂亮的 
bodybuilders 健美運動者，鍛鍊肌肉者 
broad 寬的，闊的 
cafeteria 自助餐館，自助食堂 
campaigns （尤指政治、商業或軍事的）運動 
candidates （職位）申請人，候選人 
cheekbones 顴骨，頰骨 
chiseled 鑿刻的；如鑿刻的；輪廓分明的 
climate 氣候 
confuse 把……弄糊塗，使困惑；把……混同，混淆 
consumers 消費者；消耗者 
contemplated 盤算；沈思，冥想 
contentment 滿意的；滿足的；知足的 
cosmetics 化妝品，美容品；cosmetic的名詞複數 
demeanor 舉動，行為；風度 
doctor 竄改（文件，賬目等） 
encouraged 受到鼓舞的；信心倍增的 
essayist 散文家，隨筆作家，評論家 
extensively 廣大地；廣泛地 
futile （行動）無作用的；無效的；不成功的 
harvard 哈佛大學；哈佛大學學生（或畢業生） 
horrendously 恐怖地，駭人聽聞地 
illusion 幻覺，幻想 
immaculate 潔淨的，無汙垢的 
implying 暗指，暗示 
joggers 慢跑者 
lure 誘惑力，誘惑 
mediocre 中等的；平凡的；二流的 
multitude 許多，眾多 
nevertheless 不過，仍然；儘管如此 
paycheck 付薪水的支票；薪津 
perfect 完美的，完滿的，無瑕的 
personality 個性，性格；人格 
phenomenon （尤指不尋常的或有趣的）現象 
physiques 體格，體形 
plunge （使）投入；（使）插入；（使）刺入 
prey 被捕食的動物，獵物 
probable 很可能真實的；很可能發生的 
professional 專家，內行 
prospective 潛在的客戶／可能成為雇主的人／即將為人父母者等 
pursuit 追求；從事；實行 
recruits 招聘，吸收；（尤指軍隊）徵募新兵 
resolved 下定決心的；堅定的；堅決的 
rigorous 嚴密的，縝密的；嚴謹的 
scrawny 瘦骨嶙峋的，皮包骨的 
secret 祕密的，機密的 
selection 選擇；挑選 
smarter 伶俐的，機警的；精明的 
starkly 嚴酷地；嚴厲地；明顯地；突出地 
streamlined 流線型的；優化效率後的；整併後的 
strive （尤指長期或不畏艱難地）努力，奮鬥，力爭 
stubborn 頑固的，執拗的，倔強的 
succumbed 屈服；委棄；聽任；被壓垮；死 
throughout 在各處；自始至終 
trait （個人的）特徵，特性，品質 
treacherous （地面或大海尤因氣候惡劣）極端危險的，凶險的 
tuition （尤指一對一或小班進行的）教學，講授，指導 
wary 謹慎的；小心翼翼的 


