Fable 166 (Phaedrus 4.26 = Perry 522)
Simonides and the Twin Gods

Elsewhere(在別處) I have described the great value people place on learning, and now I will record for future reference how greatly learning is honoured(獎勵) by the gods; this is another story about Simonides, whom(誰) I have spoken of before. In exchange(交換) for an agreed-upon fee, the poet Simonides was to write a victory ode(頌歌) for a certain boxer. Simonides accordingly(相應地) sought out a place of peace and quiet, but the unpromising(沒出息的) subject-matter hampered(阻礙) his artistic(藝術的) impulse(衝動). As a result, Simonides relied on the usual poetic licence(許可證), which allowed him to include the gods Castor and Pollux as part of his poem, alluding(暗示) to the renown(聲望) that the sons of Leda, those celestial(天外的) twins(雙胞胎), had also enjoyed in boxing. Simonides’ client praised(讚揚) the work but he paid the poet only one third of the agreed-upon fee. When Simonides demanded(堅決請求) the rest, his patron told him, ‘Let the twins pay the rest, since their praise occupies two-thirds of the poem Of course,’ the man added, ‘I don’t want people to think that you have been sent away in anger, so please agree to come to my house for dinner this evening. I have invited all my relatives(親戚), and I want you to be in their number as well.’ Although Simonides had been cheated(欺騙) and was still upset about the loss he had suffered, he agreed to come, not wanting to harm his reputation(名譽) by parting(告別的) with his patron(贊助者) on bad terms. The dinner hour arrived and Simonides took his place at the table. The party sparkled(閃耀) with wine and good cheer, and the house resounded(回響) with the delightful(愉快的) sounds of the extravagant(奢侈的) banquet(宴會), when all of a sudden two young men appeared. They were completely covered with dust and sweat, and they had the bodies of supermen. They ordered one of the servant boys to summon(命令…到) Simonides, urging(敦促) him to be quick about it, as it was a matter of great importance(重要性). The awestruck(頓生敬畏的) servant roused(喚醒) Simonides, and the poet(詩人) had barely moved one foot away from the dining room when the structure(結構) suddenly collapsed(萎陷的), crushing everyone beneath(在下) it. Meanwhile, there were no young men to be found at the door. When the sequence(一連串) of events became generally known, everyone realized that, with their presence, the gods had repaid the poet by saving his life in lieu(替代) of a fee(報酬).

NOTE : Other accounts of this story focus(焦點) on the aftermath(事件結束後的一段時期) of these events: Simonides was able to identify(識別) all the victims of the disaster, despite the fact that their bodies were mangled(撕爛) beyond recognition(認出), because he remembered where each person was sitting, using the technique of the ‘loci’ or ‘places’, a popular mnemonic(有助於記憶的) device (see Cicero, Orator 2.86 and Quintilian, Institutes 11.2.11 ff.). For Phaedrus’ other story about the Greek poet Simonides, see Fable 412.



accordingly 照着，相應地 
aftermath 後果，餘波；事件結束後的一段時期 
alluding 暗示；間接提到；轉彎抹角地說到 
artistic 藝術的；美術的 
awestruck 震驚的，頓生敬畏的，驚奇不已的 
banquet 宴會，盛宴；宴請，款待 
beneath 在下；向下 
celestial 天的，天空的；天外的 
cheated 欺騙，行騙；作弊 
collapsed （肺或血管）萎陷的 
delightful 愉快的；吸引人的；有趣的 
demanded 堅決請求，強烈要求；強要 
elsewhere 在別處；去別處；到別處 
exchange 交換；調換；兌換 
extravagant 奢侈的，鋪張的；浪費的 
fee 報酬；服務費；費用 
focus （尤指注意力或興趣的）中心，焦點 
hampered 阻礙，妨礙 
honoured 獎勵；榮譽 
identify 認出，識別 
importance 重要，重大；重要性 
impulse 衝動，突然的強烈欲望 
licence 許可證，執照，牌照 
lieu 替代，取代 
mangled 絞壞；撕爛 
mnemonic 有助於記憶的；記憶的 
ode 頌歌；賦 
parting 分離的，告別的 
patron 贊助者，資助人 
poet 詩人 
praised 讚揚，表揚 
recognition 認出，認識；識別 
relatives 親戚；親屬 
renown 名聲；聲望 
reputation 名譽；聲望；名望 
resounded 鳴響，回響，迴盪；（地方）迴盪著聲音，引起回響 
roused 喚醒；激勵，使覺醒，使奮起 
sequence 一連串；一系列；順序，次序 
sparkled 發火花；閃耀 
structure 結構；構造；機構；體系 
summon 命令…到（某地）；傳喚；召喚；召集 
twins 雙胞胎之一 
unpromising 沒希望的；沒出息的 
urging 敦促；驅策；力勸 
whom （用作疑問代名詞）誰，什麼人 


