Fable 170

The Oath’s Punishment(懲罰)

A certain man took a deposit from a friend but intended(打算) to keep it for himself. When the depositor(存款人) then summoned(傳喚) him to swear(發誓) an oath(誓約) regarding the deposit(存放), he realized(了解) the danger he was in and prepared to leave the city and go to his farm. When he reached the city gates, he saw a lame(一瘸一拐的) man who was also on his way out of town. He asked the man who he was and where he was going. The man said that he was the god named Oath and that he was on his way to track(追蹤) down wicked(邪惡的) people. The man then asked Oath how often he revisited(再訪) each city. Oath replied, ‘I come back after forty years, or sometimes thirty.’ Accordingly(相應地), on the very next day the man did not hesitate(猶豫) to swear an oath that he had never received the deposit. But then the man ran into Oath, who dragged(拖) him off to the edge of a cliff. The man asked Oath how he could have said that he wasn’t coming back for another thirty years when in fact he didn’t even grant(給予) him a single day’s reprieve(緩刑). Oath explained, ‘You also need to know that if somebody intends to provoke(激怒) me, I am accustomed(慣常的) to come back again the very same day.’

The fable shows that there is no fixed day on which wicked people are punished by the god.

NOTE : The divine(像神一樣的) embodiment(化身) of the oath, called Horkos in Greek, was represented(作為代表) as being lame, since it often took him a very long time to catch up with oath-breakers and punish them. For another account of why the gods’ justice(正義) is frequently delayed, see Fable 524.



accordingly 照着，相應地 
accustomed 一貫的；慣常的 
deposit 留下；存放 
depositor 存款人；存放者；沉積器，沉澱器 
divine 神的；像神一樣的 
dragged 拖，拉，拽，牽引 
embodiment 具體化；化身 
grant （尤指政府為特殊目的給予個人或組織的）撥款，補助金 
hesitate 猶豫，躊躇 
intended 打算中的，預期的，未來的 
justice 正義；公平；正當的理由；合法 
lame （尤指動物）瘸的，一瘸一拐的 
oath （尤指法庭上的）誓言，誓約，宣誓 
provoke 激怒，挑釁 
punishment 懲罰，處罰；受罰 
realized 領悟，了解，認識到 
represented 作為…的代表（或代理人）；作為…的代言人 表示；象徵；代表 
reprieve （尤指對死刑的）撤銷令，緩刑令 
revisited 再訪；重遊；重臨 
summoned 命令…到（某地）；傳喚；召喚；召集 
swear 發（誓）；宣（誓） 詛咒，咒罵 
track 跟蹤；追蹤 
wicked 邪惡的；壞的；缺德的 


