Fable 198

The Ant and the Fly

The ant and the fly were bitterly(苦澀地) arguing about who was more important. The fly presented(提交) her case first. ‘Do you really mean to compare yourself to my exalted(顯赫的) status? I pass my time among the altars(祭壇), I wander(閒逛) through the temples(神殿) of the gods; whenever there is a sacrifice, I am the first to taste all the entrails(內臟); I can sit on the head of the king if I want and I enjoy the forbidden(禁止的) kisses of all the married women; I do not work and yet I reap(獲得) the very best of all the spoils(掠奪物). What has life given you that can compare with all that I have, you country bumpkin(鄉下佬)?’ The ant replied, ‘It is truly a wonderful thing to dine(吃正餐；吃晚飯) at the gods’ table, but only for someone whom the gods have invited, not for someone whom they hate. You say that you frequent(常去) their altars? Agreed, but you are driven away as soon as you arrive. As for the kings you mention and the women’s kisses, you are boasting(自吹自擂) about something that it is shameful(可恥的) to mention. Moreover, if you do no work then it is no surprise that you have nothing at hand when you need it. I, on the other hand, assiduously(勤勉地) gather a store of grain for the winter, while I see you feeding on manure(糞肥) piled up against the walls. Later on, when the cold winds make you shrivel枯萎) up and die, I am safe and at peace in my well-furnished abode(住所). Now that it is summer you try to provoke(挑釁) me, but in winter you have nothing to say. That should be enough to take the edge(厭煩的聲調) off your pride(自豪).’

This sort of fable shows how to recognize those people who extol(頌揚) themselves for empty deeds(行為) and those whose noble(高尚的) qualities are marked by solid accomplishments(成就).

NOTE : There is a line at the beginning of this fable which most editors treat as spurious(假的). It reads: ‘This fable tells us not to engage in useless activities.’ For another fable about the industrious(勤奮的) ant, see Fable 126. 

abode 住所；寓所 
accomplishments 成就；成績 
altars 聖壇，祭壇 
assiduously 勤勉地；不懈地；周到地 
bitterly 苦澀地；痛苦地；不痛快地 
boasting 自吹自擂，吹噓，誇耀 
bumpkin 土包子；鄉下佬 
deeds （尤指很壞或很好的）事情，行為 
dine 吃正餐；吃晚飯 
edge 尖刻的聲調；厭煩的聲調；憤怒的語氣 
entrails 內臟；腸；（物體的）內部 
exalted 重要的，顯赫的（地位） 
extol 【文】讚美；頌揚 
forbidden （尤指法律）禁止的，不准的 
frequent 常去，常到（某處） 
industrious 勤勉的，勤奮的，勤勞的 
manure 糞肥（尤指馬糞） 
noble 高尚的，偉大的，崇高的 
presented 贈送，授予；提交；展現 
pride 自豪，得意 
provoke 激怒，挑釁 
reap 收割，收穫；獲得 
shameful 可恥的，丟臉的 
shrivel （使）枯萎；（使）乾枯；（使）皺縮 
spoils 戰利品，掠奪物 
spurious 假的；偽造的；欺騙性的；私生的 
temples 廟宇，寺院；神殿 
wander 漫步；閒逛；遊蕩 


